 

THE CAPTURE, SACK, AND DESTRUCTION OF THE CITY OF COLUMBIA

William Gilmore Simms

From the Columbia Phoenis
Published by Julian A. Selby

COLUMBIA, S.C., TUESDAY, 21 MARCH 1865, VOL. 1, NO. 1.

I.
It has pleased God, in that Providence which is so inscrutable to man, to visit
our beautiful city with the most cruel fate which can ever befall States or cities.
He has permitted the cruel and malignant enemy to penetrate our country almost without impediment; to pollute our homes with his presence; to rob
and ravage our dwellings, and to commit three-fifths of our city to the flames.
Eighty-four squares, out of one hundred and twenty-four (!) which the city contains, have been destroyed, with scarcely the exception of a single house. The
ancient capitol building of the State--that venerable structure which, for seventy
years, has echoed with the eloquence and wisdom of the most famous statesmen--is laid in ashes; six temples of the Most High God have shared the same
fate; eleven banking establishments; the schools of learning, the shops of art and
trade, of invention and manufacture; shrines equally of religion, benevolence, and industry; are all buried together in one congregated ruin. Humiliation
spreads her ashes over our homes and garments, and the universal wreck exhibits only one common aspect of desnair. It is for us, as succinctly but as fully as
possible, and in the simplest language, to endeavor to make the melancholy record of our wretchedness, so that our sons may always remember, and the whole Christian
world everywhere may read.

II.
When, by a crime, no less than blunder, Gen. Johnston was remved from the command of our armies in Georgia, which he had conducted with such signal ability,
there were not a few of our citizens who felt the impending danger, and trembled at the disastrous consequences which they partly foresaw.  The removal of a
General so fully in the confidence of his troops, who had so long baffled the conquests, if he could not arrest the march, of the enemy, was of itself a proceeding
to startle the thoughtful mind.  The enemy loudly declared his satisfaction at the event, and on repeated occasions since has expressed himself to the same effeect.
He was emboldened by the change, and almost instantly after, his successes became rapid and of the most decided character.

Gen. Johnston was by nature, no less than training and education, the very
best of our generals to be opposed to Gen. Sherman. To the nervo sanguine temperament, eager and impetuous, of the latter, he opposed a moral and physical
nature--calm, sedate, circumspect; cool, vigilant and wary--always patient and
watchful of his moment--never rash or precipitate, but ever firm and decisive--
his resources all regulated by a self-possessed will, and a mind in full possession
of that military coup d'oeil which, grasping the remotest relations of the field,
is, probably, the very first essential to a general having the control of a large and
various army.

The error which took Hood into the colder regions of Tennessee, at the
beginning of winter, was one which the Yankee General was slow to imitate,
especially as, in so moving, Hood necessarily left all the doors wide open which
conducted to the seaboard.  It required no effort of genius--nay, did not need even
even the suggestions of ordinary talent--to prompt the former to take the pathways which were thus laid open to him. Even had he not already conceived the
propriety of forcing his way to the Atlantic coast, and to a junction with his shipping, the policy of then doing so would have been forced upon him by the 
proceeding of his rival, and by the patent fact that there were no impediments to
such a progress. We had neither army nor general ready to impede his march. It
suggested itself. The facility of such a progress was clear enough, and, with that
quickness of decision which distinguishes the temperament of Sherman, he at
once rushed into the open pathway.

The hasty levies of regular troops, collected by Hardee and the clans of scattered militia, 
gathered with great difficulty and untrained to service, were rather
calculated to provoke his enterprise than to impede his march; and, laying waste
as he went, after a series of small and unimportant skirmishes, he made his way
to the coast, made himself master of Savannah, and, from the banks of that
river, beheld, opened before him, all the avenues into and through South
Carolina. It is understood that Hardee had in hand, to oppose this progress,
something less than 10,000 men, while the force of Sherman was, in round
numbers, something like 50,000, of which 38,000 consisted of infantry--the
rest of artillery and cavalry.

